Cozo runs (almost) everywhere
==============================

Version 0.1 of Cozo can be used embedded from Python, NodeJS, Java, Rust
and C, in addition to running standalone as a web server. Immediately
after its release, many people asked about the feasibility of using Cozo
embedded on mobile devices.

There was one major obstacle to supporting mobile: Cozo 0.1 used RocksDB
as the storage engine, and compiling RocksDB for mobile devices is not
an easy task. We chose RocksDB because it could handle a huge amount of
concurrency and is very fast, but the concurrency part may not be
relevant for the mobile case: you almost always have only one process
concurrently accessing the database.

So we ripped apart the storage engine code, made a nice and minimal
interface out of it, and now Cozo supports swappable storage engines! At
the time of this writing, you can choose from the following:

-  In-memory engine
-  SQLite engine
-  RocksDB engine
-  Sled engine
-  TiKV engine

They offer different trade-offs:

-  The in-memory engine is perfect if you just want to use Cozo as a
   computation engine. For us, it also made writing tests much easier.
   The downside is that it doesn’t persist data, and it doesn’t support
   much *write* concurrency.
-  The SQLite engine uses a minimal amount of resources, is easy to
   compile for almost all platforms including mobile, and is reasonably
   fast for reads. SQLite markets itself as a *file storage format*, and
   we took advantage of that by making SQLite the backup format for all
   engines. In this way when you backup your database, you get a
   single-file SQLite-backed Cozo database. You do not need to restore
   the backup to look inside: the backup *is* a fully functional
   database. As a backup format, it is also extremely space-efficient
   after you gzip it. The downside is as expected: SQLite is not very
   fast when it comes to writing and is effectively single-threaded when
   write concurrency is involved. But as we have said, these are usually
   not problems on mobile.
-  The RocksDB engine is crazy fast for both reads and writes and can
   handle an enormous amount of concurrency, while still being rather
   conservative on resource usage. In particular, its storage on disk is
   compressed, making its disk space requirements for live databases the
   smallest among all persistent options.
-  We included Sled as an engine just because we can. The only benefit
   is that it is pure Rust, and we are not Rust fundamentalists. It is
   not faster than SQLite for the usual workload that Cozo encounters
   and uses way more disk space.
-  The TiKV option is the slowest among all options (10x to 100x slower)
   since data must come from the network. The benefit is that TiKV is a
   distributed storage. We included it so that people may decide for
   themselves if it offers value for them. By the way, 100x slower *than
   the other storage options* may not be slow compared to the average
   graph databases in the market.

As a result of the storage engine refactoring, Cozo now runs on a much
wider range of platforms, including iOS, Android, and web browsers (with
web assembly)! We have also expanded the officially supported languages
where you can use Cozo embedded: Swift and Golang. Even if your
platform/language combination is not supported, you can still use Cozo
with the client/server mode. Or you can try to compile Cozo from source
and interface it with your platform/language: let us know if you
encounter problems, and we will help!
